---
title: "Explaining caste-based disparities in enrollment for national health insurance program (RSBY) in India: A decomposition analysis"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/pna_paper3
excerpt: 'In this paper I have decomposed the differences in health insurance enrollments under India's national health insurance scheme (RSBY) for various caste categories'
date: 2020-05-20
venue: 'Working Paper'

---
Introduction: Casteism significantly affects healthcare access and health outcomes in India. Caste-based discrimination results in higher poverty rates and worse health outcomes in people at the lower-end of the caste hierarchy. The RSBY, a national health insurance program, was created to improve health care access for the poor. Objectives: To measure caste-based disparities in RSBY enrollment in India. To decompose the contribution of relevant factors in enrollment differentials for different caste groups. Methods: Using data from the 2015-16 National Family Health Survey, we compare RSBY enrollment rates for different caste categories (Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST), and Other Backward Caste (OBC) against General Category households. We use non-linear extension of Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition and estimate two decomposition models, by pooling coefficients across the comparison groups and all caste groups. Enrollment differentials are decomposed into household head and individual characteristics, household level determinants, media access, and state-level fixed effects, allowing 2000 replications and random ordering of variables. Results: Data on 480,766 households show that ST households had the highest enrollment (18.8%) followed by SC (14.1%), OBC (10.7%) and General (9.3%) categories. Our models account for 6-76% of differential enrollments by caste. Household factors, family head’s characteristics, media access, and state level fixed effects account for most of the gap in enrollment. Conclusion: The study highlights the effect of caste on enrollment in the RSBY. Results confirm that caste influences access to RSBY in India. More specifically, higher RSBY enrollments among lower castes are significantly explained by their low socioeconomic status. The policy interventions therefore should focus on improving socio-economic conditions for the poor lower caste and tribal families so the gap in health care access is further minimized in India.
[Download paper here](available upon request)
